Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
Goran, good afternoon.
-Good afternoon.
Thank you for being
a guest on our show.
Many famous people from the world
of sports have been guests on this show.
In fact, all who have been guests were
greats and had excellent careers.
However, I can't remember the last time
someone at their peak,
a global star like you,
was a guest.
And that's why I thank you on behalf
of the entire team. How are you?
How are you spending your time after
Đoković and that situation with Rybakina?
Tell us more about it.
-Now I'm on forced vacation again.
Thank you for inviting me to the show.
This is the first time I've had
an interview with someone
who isn't a journalist.
I hope it will be interesting.
And we both come from
the world of sports.
It was a bit strange. I don't want to
talk about it much, but I can say
it's a sad and strange story.
She was the best female tennis player
in the world to me even before
I became her coach. -The best.
-Because she plays the most
beautiful and simplest game.
And I really enjoyed the job.
Unfortunately, some things happened
off the court that I couldn't control,
and I didn't want to be a part of it
or part of that story.
I decided it was best
for me to step down.
I wish her all the best in her career.
She will always be in the top five
or top ten best female players.
But it was a good experience.
I never thought I would be
a female coach, and I really liked it.
I don't know if I'll coach women again,
but after Novak and after that
long ten-month break...
-You miss your job. -It was interesting.
That means you fell in love with coaching,
which is the same in every sport.
Does coaching make up for what you
had during your playing career?
And that's the adrenaline, pressure,
responsibility, importance. -Yes.
I always thought I could be a good coach,
primarily because I had coaches
I could learn from.
From the beginning of my career,
later from my coaches Mr. Niko Pilić,
Balaš Taroci, Vedran,
with whom I trained the longest.
The late Bob Brett, who taught me a lot.
So, I realized I could do that one day.
However, after my career ended,
I wasn't ready yet.
I had to take a four or five - year break
to prove to myself I was ready.
The beginning was good.
It all started with Čilić and his
Grand Slam win at the US Open.
Then came Tomaš Berdych,
then Miloš Raonić.
And then, the best tennis player of all
time, with whom I worked for five years.
It was turbulent, interesting,
and incredible to work with him.
Yes, exactly that...
I've known you for a long time.
We're about the same age
and from the same city.
We have mutual friends,
we hung out and went out together.
You surprised me when you
decided to become a coach.
You said several times
that you believed in it.
That you could convey ideas
and knowledge.
And you knew you would succeed.
You also said you were
challenged as a coach.
A priori, before you even started,
there was a lot of distrust.
But you cleared up all doubts
by winning 12 Grand Slams
with Đoković and Čilić.
Tell us a little...
As a coach, I'm interested in how
a coach in tennis can change the game.
I'm not thinking about physical
or psychological preparation.
But how can you change
the way Đoković hits the ball,
who you yourself say is the best
tennis player in the world?
And one of the best athletes.
And he was the best player
even before you became his coach.
How did you manage
to convince him of that?
First, let me say something
about that distrust.
I don't know why it was always like that,
maybe it's because of my facial expression.
But I always had to prove myself,
first as a tennis player,
and later as a coach.
Someone can like me or not,
but I have results behind me
that no one can dispute.
I think I'm a slightly different type
of coach. You're involved in a team sport,
and when you enter the locker room,
there are 30 ego maniacs,
maybe more or less.
And you have to control all of them.
Tennis is an individual sport.
In fact, it's a gladiatorial sport,
but there's no contact.
Every day you have to give
300% of yourself.
No one asks about your health
or if you even want to play.
And when you come to
a genius like Novak,
whose rule is that what was good today
is no longer good tomorrow.
The next day everything
has to be better.
Something better is always sought.
I'm not for always changing things.
But for making the best possible
use of what you have.
It's true that we worked on improving
the second and first serve,
on the accuracy of those serves.
On being a little more aggressive.
On positioning at the net.
But those are all things...
You train something that you
might play during a match.
People don't understand that.
It rarely happens that what we train
happens during a match.
You can never organize training
to look like a match.
No. -That's impossible.
Training is training,
but a match is a match.
And we have the same
problem in football.
People always go back to the old ways
when there's a difficult situation.
It seems to me that Federer said:
'I don't play against an opponent,
I play against the ball.'
Because that's how he understood it.
Everyone has their own
way of dealing with it...
Why are the best players the best?
Why was Federer the best?
Why was Novak the best?
Because he's flesh and blood too.
He said his stomach hurts
before every match,
that he's nervous, and he's
nervous during the match.
But I notice that. -Because
you were a tennis player too.
But nervousness affects
the opponent, not him.
He's always at his level.
He always comes out on top,
that's why he's the best.
There's a ranking of people who handle
nervousness and pressure better.
Who handle those things better.
He's simply like that.
He's one of a kind, such a player
appears once in 100,000 years.
But he had two players
who were healthy competition.
Roger, Rafael, and Nole became better
players because of that competition.
It was a triangle of three
who helped each other.
First, there were those two,
then came a guy I knew from 14.
And he disrupted their Western theory.
So, it all fell apart for them.
From his father, who helped him...
Despite all the illogical things
that happened, he became the best.
It's true we work on those things,
but can you realize them in a match?
He won those Grand Slams.
He improved his serve,
his game at the net.
Novak always had a good serve,
but people didn't talk much about it.
They talked more about
his movement on the court.
It's important to establish
a system with the player.
Trust. That he trusts you.
Because if he doesn't believe
in what I'm saying,
or if I don't believe it
and he notices, there's no point.
It's the same in team sports.
-I can pack my things and leave.
Being his coach for five years is like
coaching Real Madrid, isn't it?
That's what I told him when
he asked me to be his coach.
It's like when someone from Real Madrid
calls and asks if you want to coach.
Of course, I agreed.
I'll just tell my family at home
that I'm in Madrid. -That's right.
He's an institution.
I was pleased just by the fact
that he even called me.
We were already friends, and I was
on the court with him many times,
but I was on the opposing side.
And my players, whom I coached,
didn't fare very well.
When he first called me,
and when I came to my first Wimbledon,
Marian Vajda helped me then
because we worked together in the beginning.
He introduced me to those things
and how they work.
I always claimed that people
from the Balkans adapt quickly.
If they dropped us from a plane
on an island,
we would find some players
and form a team.
A Balkan person can coach anyone,
but not everyone can coach
a person from the Balkans.
That's my opinion, that's what I think.
We adapt very quickly.
I agree, I've seen that myself.
Many times.
Tell me, did it help you -
you just confirmed it...
How much did it help that you also played
and were in similar situations?
My opinion is that in tennis,
there are coaches who never played ATP.
They may not be head coaches.
It's the same in football and tennis.
You often say that it's enough to see
Novak for five seconds in the morning
and you immediately know
what your whole day will be like.
You have that feeling because
you were also a player.
And that's why you tolerate
some of his reactions -
when he shouts and yells.
How much did your playing
experience help you?
It helped me because...
First, it helped that we used
to live in the same country.
And that we speak the same language,
which is very important.
Speed is very important
because I don't have time...
In football, you have halftime
to discuss tactics.
We also discuss tactics in tennis,
but we only have 10 or 15 seconds
to tell him something.
He expects that.
The courts are large,
and I don't hear half of what he says,
because people
are shouting behind me.
Then I told him that I know
how he feels on the court -
because I was a player.
Everything is allowed.
The most important thing
is to win the match.
The result is important.
You can yell if you want.
Just don't shout from 200 meters -
come closer so we can communicate.
So that never bothered me,
but it was stressful at the beginning.
Until I got used to it.
Later, I knew exactly what to say.
Sometimes he wouldn't hear me,
so I'd tell someone next to me,
and they'd pass it on to him.
It's just like that.
He's like that, and he has
to behave like that.
Although my opinion is that a player
goes on the court alone -
wins alone or loses alone.
I can't help much as a coach.
But we did what he asked of us.
And that's why the results are...
Although, in the end,
he plays alone and decides alone.
Yes, but he needs help.
You're used to playing alone.
You said something
interesting a moment ago.
That a Balkan person can coach anyone,
but a Balkan person can only be
coached by someone from the Balkans.
Do you think that people from
the Balkans are specific?
In what way? Is it physical build,
mentality, or something else?
It's a combination of everything
mentality, physicality, upbringing,
how we grew up,
how our parents raised us.
We have a different way of thinking.
I learned a lot from him.
I wish I could go back to my playing
days and apply some of that knowledge.
He took training to a higher level,
a higher level of thinking,
a higher level of everything.
But we are unique here.
We have this hunger.
We came from nothing.
From being underestimated,
from nothing, from zero,
and we always had to prove ourselves.
It was always about proving something.
Look at the man who has won the most
Grand Slam titles in men's tennis,
the greatest player of all time,
and yet, even today,
he still has to prove himself.
People question him - 'Is he injured?
Is there something wrong?'
There's always something...
-It's unfair. -It's unjust.
It's also a motivation. -Of course,
it is - that's why he's still playing.
Even during the whole COVID situation
and his stance on things...
It's always like the whole world is
against him, us, and everything.
And that drives you.
It gives you extra motivation,
strength, energy to be better.
You are from the same region,
actually, we are both from
the same city that,
considering its size,
has every right to be proud of how
many top athletes it has produced.
And at the same time,
it proudly claims to be
the craziest city in the world.
Let's go back a bit - you started
playing tennis quite early.
Why tennis? That was in the '80s, a
time when tennis was an elitist sport.
In Split, there was Hajduk
and Jugoplastika,
water polo was also big because
it was played in the summer
and had its own popularity and role.
Why tennis? In Firule?
I was born there, and my grandfather
lived there. -Pošk is there too.
I learned to swim at Pošk on Zenta.
I used to jump off that pool
that had the sea below it.
That's where I grew up.
On Zenta, I used to do vaterpolo
My father played tennis.
I spent every summer
at my grandparents' house,
and the tennis courts
were just three meters away.
When I was still in school, people
from Hajduk would come and pick out
10 or 15 of us, but I think
I chose the right sport.
Tennis was my first love.
The moment I picked up that racket,
somehow, I just clicked with it...
Everyone wanted to play
for Hajduk back then,
and Jugoplastika was dominating...
But for me, tennis was simply it.
So, your idols weren't
Vujović, Bakaš, Šurjak...
But Pilić and Franulović?
Or did you not really have idols?
No, I didn't really have...
Actually, my idol was John McEnroe.
Of course, Šurjak and the others...
They were legends, that played for
Hajduk, and that club was everything.
But I simply chose a different path.
I wanted to be
an individual athlete...
Maybe I wasn't really
an individualist.
My father always told me I was 'too
nice' to be number one in the world.
I was number two. To be number one,
your ego has to be through the roof.
Because there's always someone
trying to take you down,
always someone trying to beat you...
It's a gladiator sport, and that
kind of mindset makes you stronger.
Maybe I just wasn't ready to be number
one. But I fell in love with tennis,
and I believe that you're destined
to be good at a certain sport.
I think I chose the right one.
And in the end, the Split club
produced, as I think you mentioned,
the most top 10 players ever?
Yes, it's a global phenomenon.
There were Marijančić, Nikola Pilić,
Željko Franulović, Mate Pavić, me,
Jelena Kostanić, Petra Martić...
But to have five players in the
top 10 from a single club,
that just had five or six courts...
-That's practically nothing...
That doesn't exist anywhere else.
That club should be a museum,
a place where tourists coming to Split
visit and learn about the players
that were shaped there,
that came from nothing, from zero.
-I see, that's incredible.
So, how big of an influence
did your parents,
especially your father Srđan,
have on you?
Well, I think his influence
was the greatest.
My mother was always there too,
holding everything together
like only a woman can, but he
dedicated himself completely to me.
He was a university professor who left
his job because he believed in me.
He told me: 'You're better at what
you do than I am at what I do.'
Now, think about that...
-Everything he told me about tennis,
was the only truth I cared for.
Now, looking back, I realize a lot of
what he said wasn't actually correct.
But I listened to him.
To me, he was the Bible of tennis.
-The holy scripture, exactly.
That's how it was. But an
interesting thing about him...
No matter where I went,
whichever coach I trained with,
whichever academy I joined,
he would tell them all,
'You can change any of his shots,
but don't touch his serve.'
Come on! -I swear,
he told everyone that.
'His serve is his. Don't mess with it.
Let him serve however he wants.'
And this is coming from
a recreational player, right?
A recreational player
who was a professor at FESB,
who played decent tennis,
but he saw something in me.
I mean, no one could have known. Who
could guarantee what I would become...
And like you said,
it wasn't exactly a cheap sport,
it had to be paid for,
financed, pushed forward...
And then, at 14, my parents had to
make their first big decision,
whether I would continue
my education or not.
Both of them had university degrees,
and back then, you know how things
were... If you didn't go to school,
people would say, 'This one is...'
-That was the mindset back then.
'...he is a troublemaker.' -And now,
unfortunately, it's almost the norm.
Today it's normal, but back then,
it was shameful not to go to school.
But they decided that
I was special in this sport...
But then came the reality
of how to finance all of it,
in the midst of all the craziness...
They even sold the apartment...
Those are the things a young person
like me had to endure.
Sorry for interrupting, but that's
exactly what I wanted to talk about.
It's an incredible story,
but not many people know about it.
This whole thing became serious
when you were about 14.
Like we talked about over lunch,
it's an expensive sport.
your father sacrificed his career
as a university professor,
which was his dream. That's a huge
decision... You sold the apartment...
Then, in 1988, you're 17,
maybe not even that old yet,
when your sister,
unfortunately, falls ill...
Was that the moment you felt
the full weight of responsibility?
Not just the idea that it would be
good for you to become successful,
but that your family's future depended
on you? -Yes. That was it.
They sent me to Australia,
and like we talked about before, it
felt like I was one of those refugees
on a rubber dinghy, just floating
in the middle of the sea...
Will the dinghy pop? Will I sink?
Or will some ship come and save me?
I went to Australia - on a plane,
with no money, no plan, nothing.
And failure was not an option.
In my mind, there was no scenario
where I wouldn't succeed.
I had to succeed.
It was for my sister.
We needed money for her treatment.
I didn't even think about myself.
Maybe if I had thought about myself,
I wouldn't have made it.
Because you would've had options.
-Exactly. If I had other options,
maybe things would've been different.
But this was it. Mission: Sister.
Mission: Save her and her health.
And when I arrived in Australia,
everything just took off.
My life completely changed there.
-You were 17. Looking back now,
it sounds like a great story,
but at the time...
That's actually the blueprint
for so many champions.
It either breaks you,
or if you come out of that storm,
you make it to the top.
That's how you get into the top 10.
That's how you reach,
what we love to call, 'the throne'.
And after that, your career
skyrocketed-countless tournaments,
victories, highs, lows, fame,
financial success, all of it...
You became one of the most beloved,
exciting, and admired tennis players.
But when you look at your
entire career now...
A person's working life
lasts 50 years,
but an athlete's career
lasts maybe 20 or 25.
And in the end,
it's just a handful of moments,
both positive and negative,
that define everything.
Like that moment in 1988.
What are the moments that either
stopped you in your tracks
or pushed you forward?
From '88 to '89,
when I went to Australia,
was the time I got a little
push forward in my career,
and then everything just took off.
By 1990, I was in the top 10.
That same year, I played
my first Wimbledon semifinal.
'92 still stings - that Wimbledon
final. I was the absolute favorite.
I had beaten Lendl,
Edberg, and Sampras,
and then I lost in five
sets to Agassi.
No one thought
I would lose, not even me.
But now, thanks to social media, you
can go back and watch those matches,
so, I watched them back. And honestly,
he deserved to win that day.
He played better. It was like
I didn't believe in myself that day.
I didn't play the way
I should have at that level.
That's the Wimbledon final, it's like
playing in the World Cup final.
You have to bring your best,
or the other guy will. -Exactly.
My career was solid.
But the biggest drop, when everything
started going downhill, was...
In '98 you guys were in France...
-With Sampras...
...and I was in Wimbledon.
And that support from you guys...
Things were going
well for both of us.
I played the final,
and that final broke me.
It crushed me because I truly believe
I was the better player.
I played better. I should have won.
And I didn't. -Yeah.
And from that moment on,
everything started going downhill.
If you could replay one match,
which one would it be?
'92. -'92. -Because if I had won
that final, I think everything
would have opened up for me.
It would have given me more strength,
more confidence, and I would
have been a better player.
I believe I would have won
another Grand Slam. -Yeah.
Maybe I would have even
reached number one. -Yeah.
And now we come to that story,
the one that's been told a 100 times
but never gets old.
Wimbledon 2001.
What I want to know is
where did you find the confidence?
Where did you find the belief to win?
Because at that time,
you were struggling. -Yes.
You weren't playing well.
And before that, there was the whole
story with the rackets from Brighton.
By the way, since we're
talking about rackets...
Is it true that the first two rackets
your father bought for you,
for which he borrowed the money,
you broke both of them?
I did. In three seconds.
It was a Sunday.
And he even told me:
'Don't go to practice,
it's a stupid Sunday...'
And I kept saying, 'I want to go, I'll
be calm...' Yeah, sure, I'll be calm.
He didn't even have time to arrive,
and I had already... -Smashed them?
Smashed them.
And then the look on his face...
He didn't know whether to kill me
right then or later.
The man borrowed money.
He had to pay it back,
then borrow again to buy me new
rackets so that I, like a lunatic,
could break them again.
It wasn't easy to get
rackets back then.
And there I was,
breaking them in two minutes.
Honestly, the burden that
he and my mother took on for me,
that's an unbelievable kind of love
from parents to their child.
But, well, somehow it paid off.
Yes, he has stents and a bypass,
his health is pretty ruined.
I think they would do it all over again...
Would they do it all over again?
-I think they would do it all over again.
The road was tough,
but in the end, it all paid off.
It paid off the most because of 2001.
Before Wimbledon, it was Brighton?
Something happened that
had never happened before.
End of 2020. -OK. -Sorry, 2000.
How was it? Tell us.
-I came to Brighton.
You lived in England. The wind
was blowing, I don't know why I came.
Actually, I know why I came.
I had to win two rounds in 2001
to be able to enter the Australian Open.
I couldn't beat anyone,
literally, I couldn't.
I came with three rackets. By chance,
I won the first round and broke a racket.
I'm playing the second round.
I know what this match means.
If I win, I'm in the main draw,
if not, I'm in the qualifiers.
I already broke one racket
at the start, I have one more left.
In the third set, 8000 break points,
I don't convert any.
I mean, I have one more racket.
I knew I had it.
I thought, should I, shouldn't I?
I say to myself, screw the Australian Open,
and I smash it. Now there's a problem. This
has never happened in the history of tennis.
The head referee comes over
and asks me: What do we do?
Why are you asking me?
You're the head referee.
He says: I don't know,
we don't have a rule for this.
Can you borrow a racket?
I say: I can't, I won't.
He says: OK, due to a lack of
equipment, I have to forfeit the match.
That's how I entered inglorious history.
It is a funny story, though.
In the end, I played the qualifiers.
I lost in the first round and went back.
Since then, everything started...
-Let's go back to this Wimbledon.
Objectively, it's tough to win.
Stan Smith said
a phenomenal sentence.
Experience allows you to
know what you need to do,
and confidence allows you
to actually do it.
Where did you get your confidence,
your belief in yourself?
That's a good question.
I think that I...
First, I was in Split.
I was preparing. At that time,
Hajduk won the championship.
I was in Varaždin,
then I was at the celebration.
And I'm talking with the team.
Look at this beautiful welcome.
My friend says that soon
they will welcome me like this too.
I say, you'll come to pick me up
at the airport when I return.
No, no, come on. Come on,
it wouldn't be bad.
To win Wimbledon
and get a welcome like this.
But, let's not...
Somehow, during those few weeks
when I was in Varaždin,
whether Hajduk would win,
all that tension... -It charged you up.
It charged me up, but still,
it can't charge me up for tennis.
I was ranked 128th,
and I was playing terribly.
I know that I arrived in
Hertogenbosch, in the Netherlands.
I changed my rackets.
You don't change rackets.
You need to test them for a few months.
My motto is that I can't play worse.
I can play the same or better.
Worse than this...
I simply felt...
Two days before Wimbledon,
the racket I was playing with,
when I served well,
it made a certain sound.
I hadn't heard that sound
for a year and a half, two years.
And then I... -Got it back.
-I got the sound back.
I said, okay, the sound is there,
I'm playing well.
My father arrived on Sunday,
he brought newspapers.
He had never in his life brought me...
-A magazine. -The magazine 'Košarka.'
I never read it. I knew it existed,
I'd buy it, flip through it.
He would bring me Sportske and others,
but never that one.
In the middle, a Dražen poster.
I say, this must be some kind of sign.
So, in 2001, there's a Dražen
poster in the middle.
Unfortunately, he's been
gone for a long time.
It was an anniversary,
because in 1993, unfortunately...
I put it up on the wall.
I say, he's come to shake me up
and set me straight.
After the second round,
I felt that I was playing good tennis.
But what can I say? I'm ranked 128th.
I'm happy that I got a wild card,
an invitation for Wimbledon. Now to say
that I play well every day...
Each new round was almost, almost.
Until I reached the semifinals.
How are you playing so well?
Did you improve your serve?
Is it all in your head? -No, I'm serving well,
moving well. -You feel it? -I feel it.
I beat Moya, who was a seed,
and Roddick, and Safin, and Rusedski.
They couldn't break my serve. My serve
brought me back, and everything clicked.
Now comes the big match against Henman.
For the first time, he's playing a semifinal
that's not against Sampras.
So, he's basically in the final already.
I watch the news-Henman Day,
Henman this, finally we have a finalist.
I think: Slow down,
you'll have the devil instead.
Then what happened, happened...
-The rain. -With the rain.
I have to say, the rain saved me.
When the match was interrupted,
he was simply better than me.
I didn't know what to do.
That rain came...
It didn't come by accident.
That's it. -It came with a purpose.
It came at just the right moment.
That day, I knew- when we
didn't return to the court,
it was seven in the evening.
Alan Mills, the referee, came,
he said you're going home.
We continue tomorrow.
I knew that was it.
I told my coach, that's it.
We're winning. -That you would win.
-He said: No chance.
I saw his face the next day.
Every time I stepped on the court...
And the match kept getting interrupted,
it lasted three days.
His facial expression
kept getting worse and worse.
I was getting better,
and he was getting worse.
It was simply... -Destined.
-Destined. I can't say that
it was my best tennis. Maybe
I played my best Wimbledon in 1994,
when I also played the final.
But I just played my best tennis
at the right moments.
When I needed to, I played well.
When I needed to, I played smart.
I served well, and when I needed to...
the rain came.
Something always came
that helped me.
Then I think, now I'm playing my fourth final,
but for the first time on a Monday.
Maybe that's also a sign.
I've never played a final on a Monday.
It had only been played on a Monday
maybe four times in Wimbledon history.
That atmosphere, the madness,
a football-like atmosphere-nothing like tennis.
Somehow, everything... That's...
I can't say that I
knew I would win,
but failure was not
an option. -It doesn't exist, yes.
You won two US Opens,
against Rafter, but this one is mine.
Mine and no one else's.
-This one is mine,
and we'll play for 13 days if needed.
I have to win. -Exactly, that superstition.
A lot of athletes are superstitious.
And I was too. That's often
where you find confidence.
You mentioned Dražen,
the Wimbledon dedication to Dražen.
The Americans made a film about it.
It became one of
the 100 greatest sports stories.
When Leicester won the championship,
that was nothing compared to this.
Henman, the rain, everything together.
Nadal says he's superstitious,
but only on the court.
But it means something to a person.
It strengthens you,
gives you an injection of confidence.
Exactly. It gives me
a certain calmness.
I had five or six things...
-Was there something with the urinal?
The urinal, the parking, the Teletubbies.
But if I hadn't done any of those things,
I would have thought... Once I did them,
I felt a sense of peace inside.
I did it in half an hour,
and I said, that's it.
Now I'm ready to play. Now I'm
ready, so beat me if you can.
I did my thing...
-That gave you confidence.
Like Stan Smith used to say. -I couldn't
win based on my ranking.
In the tournament before Wimbledon,
I lost to an unimportant player.
There was no tennis confidence.
But the poster and all these other things
gave me all of that, a certain calmness.
When we put it all together,
we pulled out that confidence.
Day by day, I was getting better,
believing in myself more and more.
-An impossible story.
The way we watched it,
an unbelievable story.
A final on a Monday, a final that
didn't last three, but five sets.
The fifth set was a whole lifetime,
plus all the mistakes and everything else.
Then the celebration in Split.
An eternal validation in your own city.
A reception that even CNN covered,
all of it together.
Just you and Oliver.
Your celebration
and the farewell of the great Oliver.
Back then, you said...
You said if you weren't born in Split,
you would be... Is that right?
Do you think that where you're from
determines how much you'll achieve?
Do you think you would have done
more or less if you were born
100 meters from Bollettieri's academy?
I think I would have. Maybe I would have
been a totally different type of person.
Maybe I wouldn't have...
Split is a tough city.
One day, Split loves you,
and 200,000 people will welcome you.
The next day, those same 200,000
people will want to kill you.
There was always
someone better than you,
but their mother didn't
wake them up for practice,
they missed the bus,
or the coach didn't like them.
Or they liked to drink. -They were
better than you, Kukoč, Rađa, and me.
But when I was serving
in the middle of summer,
they were playing picigin
at Firule and Baće.
Split gave me something
that only Split has.
We all talk about that defiance.
It's important, but you can't
win just with that. You say
you'll get stubborn and win.
Split has something special.
It made me...
I think I became a better
and stronger person.
Through everything I went through,
and all those people who shaped me
in tennis, from recreational
players to all the coaches,
to school, to being unrecognized.
You become tougher, stronger.
That helped me at that moment
when I was lost.
Then that reward comes,
when you stand before 200,000 people.
Finally, you've won,
they were waiting for it.
I understand,
I agree with everything.
Split is a tough city. People
love you in their own way.
They love you, but they won't admit it.
Half of them act like they won Wimbledon.
I remember an anecdote.
This will be interesting.
Back then, we played for Hajduk.
I was 23-24 years old,
and you were 20-21. That's when
the club at Gripe changed its name.
It had one name,
then it later changed it.
The owner decided
there is a dress code.
And you can't enter
wearing sneakers.
It wasn't an opening,
just a normal evening.
I was invited to New York,
London, but this guy at the door
won't let me in because
I wore sneakers.
Five minutes later,
a guy walks in wearing a ski suit.
He would not let Ivanišević in.
-That was just like that.
But this is Split.
-Yes, this is Split.
You can't be mad at that.
It's just how it is.
I turned around and left.
You said it well.
Split is like that.
They love you,
but won't say they love you.
What does he want?
Who is he?
They don't want to tell me
anything because I'm also
from that city, and that's it.
Like: 'Who is he?'
Who is Inavišević, who is Slaven?
We just have that kind of mindset.
But when it's needed,
we'll always help.
When it's tough,
they're there for you.
To wrap this up...
Split is best represented
by incredible graffiti.
Back then, when you won Wimbledon,
the city was on fire.
Dežulović wrote
a great column back then.
TV's are flying out of windows,
everything is burning,
and you can't see the sky.
In the morning, graffiti appears,
not 'Thank you, Goran,'
not 'Bravo, Goran,' not
'Goran, you're the king,'
or anything like that, but:
'Finally!'
Like: 'Why are you tormenting us?'
Yes, you've been tormenting us
for 20 years.
But it's hard for people
to understand some things.
You have to be born there
and leave that maternity ward
to get the Split chip.
Only our people understand that.
That kind of joke,
with nothing mean-spirited.
We're just like that.
Simply put, we're like that,
and only people from there
can understand and accept it.
-Yes, bravo.
After that famous Wimbledon,
comes the gentle end.
Has there been saturation,
injuries, or a mix of both
that made you leave?
Then in 2020, came the induction...
the crowning achievement
after the Davis Cup,
your induction
into the Hall of Fame.
McEnroe, your idol,
introduced you.
Would you like
to tell us about that?
When I was chosen,
there was no greater honor.
Is that the peak?
-Yes, that's the peak.
It's like they put me in a museum.
I'm alive, but I'm there.
When I entered that museum
in Newport Beach,
it was incredible.
All the legends were there,
so I asked myself:
'Did I enter the wrong city
or the wrong museum?
What am I doing here?'
Simply put, you feel
honor and pride.
It's truly an
incredible recognition.
You must give a speech
in front of everyone.
And when I spoke,
something incredible happened.
The sky was dark,
as if rain was coming.
But suddenly,
everything calmed down.
The sky turned gray,
and I gave my speech.
There's a timer,
you must speak for six minutes.
And you didn't prepare it, right?
-I had some notes.
I don't like preparing speeches,
it never turns out right.
But I said what I wanted.
I thanked the people
I needed to thank.
At one point,
I wanted to thank my sister,
but I didn't,
so I wouldn't cry.
But it felt like she did
something up there,
so it didn't rain.
She let me speak.
All those people
who shaped my career
made that moment truly incredible.
Finally, I admitted
I had done something good.
So, McEnroe brought you there,
and you played with everyone?
You played McEnroe, Connors,
Becker, Sampras,
Agassi, Lendl, Wilander,
Edberg... -Federer, Nadal...
Yes, all the way to Đokovic?
-I haven't played Đokovic.
Which one was the toughest
opponent for you?
The toughest for me
was Sampras.
That man ruined many
beautiful moments in my life.
Sleepless nights...
-Was he the best?
If a tournament were organized now...
It's kind of a silly question.
If a tournament were held now,
with all at their peak,
at 25 years old,
without Đokovic,
since you haven't played him,
who would you bet on?
It depends on the surface,
then or now.
Still, Federer and Nadal
are such geniuses,
they'd adapt to any conditions.
It's hard to compare eras,
but it wouldn't be easy
against the great Sampras,
on grass, hard, or clay...
But I think Nadal
would beat them all.
And if Đokovic is included?
-I think Novak would beat them all.
Novak would win
because he returns well,
he adapts to both
fast and slow balls.
Maybe a tight match, 4-5 sets.
It's hard to compare eras,
but... -Is he your favorite?
He marked my career.
Him, Agassi, Courier, Chang.
I had the honor of playing
Borg, Connors, McEnroe,
but also Federer and Nadal.
Sampras, when he does this...
My God! Do you know what he said?
I read it the other day
and laughed so hard.
What did Chang say when asked
about Sampras' flaws?
That he can't cook.
Well, he's right. And maybe
he knows that too. -Maybe.
It was a shame I faced him
only in semifinals or finals.
He'd play terribly early on,
but I never got him then.
We were top seeds.
And after that, it was...
Go home.
Now, as a coach, how do you assess
Đokovic, Nadal and Federer?
What are their similarities, differences,
and their legacy in tennis?
These are the three greatest
players ever.
Maybe I'd compare them like this...
Federer plays the most beautiful tennis.
Even when he plays badly,
it's a joy to watch.
Then there's Rafa,
a fighter to exhaustion.
He's a fighter
who gives his all on the court.
Winning 14 French Opens -
that will never happen again.
Not just in tennis,
but in any sport.
Novak is the most complete
of all three.
The best, the greatest of all time.
I'm sorry that in 2023,
he was just 1-2 points away
from winning Wimbledon.
Then he would have won all four.
In 2021, he lost to Medvedev,
didn't play his best.
But Novak is the most complete.
At Roland Garros,
Nadal was better.
But Novak was always
the one who could win all four.
That Golden Slam,
including the Olympics...
He is, by far,
the most complete player.
They pushed each other,
made each other even better.
Novak came later,
maybe that's why...
Maybe that's why he's
less appreciated by some.
And in football, we have
Ronaldo and Messi.
Before that, Connors,
Borg, McEnroe.
But what you said about Novak,
I wanted to ask you.
You said he's treated differently
from Nadal and Federer.
And that it has to do
with where he's from.
Did you feel that yourself?
You mentioned this to Dea
in an interview. -Yes, that's right.
People say, 'It doesn't matter where
you're from.' How doesn't it matter?
It matters. Everything matters.
If Luka Modrić were English,
he'd be the most expensive
footballer ever.
Is it just business,
or do they control the media?
It's not the same.
One is Swiss, one is Spanish,
then comes a guy from Serbia -
they don't get it.
How, where did he come from?
He says what he thinks.
He says what others think
but won't say.
He was willing to sacrifice
his career for the vaccine.
Completely? -Completely.
-He refused to get vaccinated.
And now, people say that vaccine
caused harm, locked us up for years.
But he stood by his choice.
Which top athlete
would sacrifice everything?
He was trashed
in 100,000 ways.
I was there with him,
I know everything.
Why? Because he has
his own opinion.
He never told anyone
what to do. We all got vaccinated.
He never said,
'Don't get vaccinated.'
Never in his life. He organized
a tournament in Belgrade,
where he arranged vaccination
for other players,
but he didn't get vaccinated.
And then they condemned him.
Everything he says is somehow
against the Western world.
Just because he speaks the truth,
and the truth sometimes hurts.
People don't want to hear it,
but he never feared saying it.
I know what others think,
but they wrap it up...
And of course, we're all from Balkans,
so they put us in a box.
'You are from the Balkans,
you are this, you are that...'
But he proved them wrong on the court,
and they can't take that from him.
He's the best.
You don't have to like him,
but you have to respect him.
Eventually, they had to acknowledge him.
Because he's the greatest.
If he were one of the other two,
they would have already done it.
But that's what we talked about.
Sometimes, that works
to your advantage.
It pushes you even harder,
what we call 'grinta' down here.
And then you show them
what you can do. -Yes, exactly.
And there's also business in it.
-Sport has become one big business.
We used to say sports
were free of politics,
but now... That's where
it's the most.
For three years, politics decided
what you could say, where you could go.
If you weren't vaccinated,
you were cast aside.
Like in that movie,
Battle on the Neretva.
'Let's go, brothers, step aside.'
Football is the biggest sports business.
-That's the world today.
100,000 competitions,
everyone wants to profit.
So it's a business,
and that's how we must act.
We can talk all we want,
we can even love the game.
Yes, we grew up
in a different time.
But that's how it is now.
Times have changed,
and we must adapt.
Yes, that's just how it is.
These two are from Switzerland
and Spain, and he's from Serbia.
And it's about money.
Now they're global stars,
but it's different when
Iva Majoli wins Roland Garros
and when Raducanu wins the US Open.
There's half a billion
pounds is involved.
And that's true, but it's also motivation
for the little people. -That's true.
For me, it was an honor
and a responsibility
to coach such a man.
To be close to him,
learn from him, and watch
all the records he achieved.
There were difficult moments,
but when you sum it up,
there were far more
beautiful and successful ones.
But it was an honor and a privilege
for him too that you were his coach.
So, a wonderful career...
and one of the most beloved
and charismatic players.
But when I analyze you,
you're seen more as a Maverick.
When you say "Ivanišević", the first
thought is a positive madman.
Everyone loves him, and it's never
boring to read his interviews
or watch him on TV. That's it.
It is silly to say that
you are underestimated.
But, in the context of your career,
more was said about what you
could have done but didn’t.
As Tiriac said when he saw you:
"This little guy will win
the Wimbledon championship."
He didn't win five, but he won one.
And you gave it your all.
For so many years, you were
the world's No. 2 player.
You won Wimbledon, the Davis Cup,
and two Olympic medals.
You entered the Hall of Fame.
What's next?
And everyone sees the glamour,
summer vacations on a yacht.
But they don't see the work,
the sacrifice, the preparation...
Yes, that's unfortunately true.
Goran has broken so many rackets.
Goran and his serve...
But I was world No. 2
in an individual sport.
You're alone there,
it's a gladiatorial sport.
Alone, and for you,
there's no substitute.
No one asks how
you are on that day.
Did I sleep well?
Is something hurting me?
I wasn't crazy, as people say.
You can't be mentally weak
and be No. 2 in the world.
Nothing happens just like that.
You said you were crazy,
so it had some impact.
Yes, three Gorans...
I calmed down a bit
with that Wimbledon story.
I put the "three Gorans"
in the spotlight.
And that story is still
relevant 24 years later.
The three Gorans are still alive.
That's incredible.
It's fascinating. I lost many
matches for no reason.
I fought myself
in many matches.
But I wouldn't be who I am
if I were really mentally ill.
That's right,
there was a lot of training.
Ferrer says,
"There's no shortcut in five sets."
You have to be ready.
I remember us talking during lunch,
about how much you trained.
The stairs on Marjan became
popular with Boško Čavka,
your fitness coach.
I don't know much about it.
Some Hajduk players-
Stipe Andrijašević,
Ante Miše, and Španjić,
they could run endlessly.
They were the best runners
with Drago Čelić.
They also trained with Boško.
They could run up those stairs.
Allegedly, they said
you did it two or three times.
Yes, Boško and I
invented those stairs.
Even today, many don’t believe
the record is unbeaten.
No one came close to me.
But those were tough trainings...
He kicks you out of the car:
"Come on!"
They threw me out
in front of schools...
"Go to the hill, see that plain,
then those 300+ stairs!"
It was a full circle.
That is all Marjan.
-And that's it.
You'll be up there in a set time,
then back down to do it again.
I couldn't say: "I'm tired!"
I said many times...
I felt sick to my stomach.
Coach says: "Go throw up!"
-And keep going.
Now, he immediately sits down,
gets water and energy drinks.
What energy drinks?
It was running on Marjan.
You meet someone and
go to the Institute and back.
Let's go along the trim track.
So, I didn't think about it...
if I stepped wrong, hurt my leg.
It could happen, but I never
thought about that. -It's crazy.
But your father instilled
that in you as a child.
If he wasn’t satisfied with training,
he'd tell you to walk home.
He'd go by car, and you
had to get home first. -Yes.
But no, not during training,
only when I went overboard
with my craziness. Because he
didn't know what to do with me.
Then he’d say: "Come on,
get home before me!"
He starts the car,
and I run along the waterfront.
Back then, if someone saw you
walking fast, they’d say:
"Look at this one!"
I sprinted like crazy
through the city.
I had to arrive before him.
So, there was no other option?
I just didn’t know if he had left,
or was coming back,
or if he really went home.
I was just running...
I neither heard nor saw anyone.
People called, waved... but no...
"Not now, my friend!"
-God, that's terrible.
How were you for training?
Would you train Goran? -Yes.
Which coaches do you remember?
-I remember all the old coaches.
Old Mr. LAci, who taught me...
-Kačer? -The late Zoran Ilić...
There was also aunt Vera,
who helped with tournaments.
Then, there was Bob Brett,
who was like a father to me.
He said you were like a son to him.
-He taught me more than just tennis.
He taught me how to treat
those who help me.
Every training,
give something to the masseuse.
"Give him something,
tell him thank you!"
Because those people
will appreciate it.
We had disagreements,
but I was great for coaching.
I could train all day.
Run and play...
There were no problems with me.
That's why I’d love
to train that Goran.
I think that Goran
would be a better player.
To pass on the experience
I have to him.
What would you change?
During matches,
to behave a little differently.
To be a little more positive
and work harder on some things.
It wasn’t all about the serve.
Maybe I would train differently.
Before, there were no weights
because the doctor forbade it.
I remember Boško and I hid,
so my father wouldn’t see us.
Because weights would
slow me down.
Yes, that’s how it used to be.
They thought I couldn't be a coach
because I was too nervous.
How could I coach someone?
And yet, I’m the calmest coach ever.
Bob Brett is old school. He demands
things be done his way.
So we sometimes had disagreements.
He coached Harry Hopman,
the greatest Australian coach.
He trained Rod Laver, Ken Rosewall.
And he was strict.
You must communicate with the player
and be five steps ahead.
Sometimes he thinks you're right,
but you're already...
You know that best. You have
more players, I have one.
If only I had communicated more...
but it wasn’t like that before.
You had to do what you were told.
The results came,
so I didn’t protest much.
But there must be communication
between coach and player.
Your relationship is complicated.
I thought about that in tennis.
It’s a direct connection
between you and the player.
There’s no club president
or director hiring me.
It's just you and me.
No 20 players where I can say:
"It's not the best,
but five are improving."
No, it’s direct and exact.
Did you help me or not?
It’s an intense, daily relationship.
No one shouts from the stands:
"Goran, go!"
There’s none of that,
but everything is clear between us.
He hired me.
Some president brought you.
You answer to Boban, then to Šuker.
-I answer to him.
To the player who hired me.
Some are patient, some are not.
We don’t have a magic wand.
Coaching Novak, he said:
"Finals aren’t enough.
Finals are a failure."
In Madrid, if you don’t win,
they wave white handkerchiefs.
"Goodbye, my friend!"
There will be a final, but we lost.
He didn’t win, but we are a team.
If you don’t win the tournament,
it’s a bad tournament.
I don’t have a problem with pressure.
You're right about that.
He is the biggest
and he is where he is.
But in training every day,
and in the match, with all the noise...
That’s my favorite.
It’s a match. I can’t do anything
spectacular there.
Just support him or say something
at the right moment.
If he hears me,
or I hear him through the noise.
But we are close in training.
He disagrees on something,
and I do too. -It’s your interaction.
Sometimes it was bad,
but in the end, it turns out well.
That’s all for now.
The second part of the conversation
is in the next show.